Introduction. During World War Two, if one single weapon in Germany's arsenal can be said to have come closest to winning the war for the Third Reich, it was without doubt the U-Boat.
Winston Churchill himself admitted as much when, after the war, he revealed that the U-Boat menace was the only thing that had really caused him to fear that Great Britain would lose the war against German). Had this happened, the Allies would have been deprived of Great Britain as a base from which to launch operations against the Third Reich, and the invasion of German-occupied Europe would probably never have taken place.
German U-Boat technology, training, tactics and combat successes far exceeded those of any of the other combatant nations, and even as the Third Reich was crumbling, technically advanced vessels such as the Type XXI, many years ahead of its time, were being put into volume production.
The ultimate defeat of the U-Boat threat owed much to a single intelligence coup by the British – the discovery of the German 'Schlusselmaschine', the so-called 'Enigma' encoding device, and the subsequent reconstruction of such a device, which led to British cryptologists cracking the German secret codes. The British were thus able to intercept and decode much of the German signals traffic, allowing them to track down German submarines and their supply vessels at rendezvous points thought to be secret, and to reroute convoys away from areas where U-Boats were know n to be lying in wait.
The breathing space which this discovery gave the British allowed time for the development of sophisticated direction finders and underwater detection devices, which finally turned the tide of war against the U-Boats. In view of the fact that for the greater part of the war the U-Boats had, unbeknown to them, the odds stacked against them, the achievements of the U-Boot Waffe were impressive.
Despite the understandably biased Allied reportage, the vast majority of U-Boat commanders carried out their duties in as honourable a fashion as this type of warfare allowed. This is attested to by the fact that so many Allied senior naval figures came forward after the war, when attempts were being made to vilify U-Boat men as war criminals, and averred that they themselves had behaved in at least as aggressive a manner, if not more so – especially in the case of some American submarine crews serving in Pacific waters – as their German counterparts.
U-Boat crewmen were predominantly volunteers throughout the war, and selection procedures were rigorous in the extreme, resulting in the U-Boot Waffe taking much of the cream of Germany's naval personnel. Though much depended on the personality of the individual commander, traditionally rigid German military discipline was much relaxed for U-Boat crews. Each man felt himself very much dependent on the others, and an second to none quickly formed among them. To this day, there is a thriving U-Boat veterans 'community', and the U-Boot Waffe has its own very striking war memorial at Moltenort, near Kiel.
Mention of U-Boats almost invariably brings to mind the great aces of World War Two, names like Kretschmer, Prien, Schepke, Luth, von Tiesenhausen and others, and the equally exceptional achievements of the U-Boat aces of World War One are often forgotten. However, what was probably the greatest single achievement in submarine warfare, the sinking of three major enemy warships by one German U-Boat in a single engagement, occurred during World War One. Korvettenkapitan Lothar Arnauld de la Periere, the greatest U-Boat ace of all time-sinking 54 enemy vessels in a single cruise – was also an officer of the Kaiserliche Marine. His name, and others such as Weddigen and Hartwig, though famous throughout the U-Boat fraternity, are little known outside Germany.
This book is intended to give the reader an overview of the achievements of the U-Boot Waffe in both wars, together with a study of the uniforms and insignia worn by U-Boat crews.
THE KAISERLICHE MARINE. When war began on 1 August 1914, Germany possessed only 20 U-Boats ready for action, compared with the Royal Navy's total of over 70 submarines. Three days later, Great Britain declared war on Germany, and ten U-Boats, half of Germany's entire fleet, set off on their first war cruise. Their target was nothing less than the Grand Fleet. In the event, two U-Boats were lost – one to a minefield – and not a single British warship was sunk; the cruise was a complete failure. On 5 September, however, the U-Boats scored their first major success when Leutnant zur See Otto Hersig sank the cruiser H.M.S. Pathfinder. Barely three weeks later Oberleutnant zur See Otto Weddigen encountered a force of British warships. In the space of less than an hour he sent the cruisers Aboukir, Cressy and Hogue to the bottom. Germany was delighted with its new heroes, and every member of the crew was decorated. Weddigen's boat, the U-9, was granted the right to bear the emblem of the Iron Cross on its conning-tower. No one could now doubt the potency of the U-Boat as a weapon, and German attacks on Allied shipping steadily increased.
One thing worried some factions in the German government: a large proportion of Britain's essential imported materials was carried by neutral ships, and it was feared that attacks on them might bring more countries into the war on Britain's side. By the beginning of 1915, however, the Germans had real ised that their rather optimistic hopes for a speedy victory were unrealistic, and that the war at sea would have to be pursued with greater determination. Accordingly the waters around the coast of Great Britain were declared a war zone by Kaiser Wilhelm, with the warning that any shipping, including neutral ships carrying war materials, encountered there was liable to be sunk without warning. Within eight months the average monthly total of Allied shipping being sunk had risen from just under 50,000 ton to almost 200,000 tons.
The decision to allow unrestricted submarine warfare had, as some Germans had feared, enraged many neutral nations, the United States in particular, since deaths of neutral citizens sometimes occurred. Then, in May 1915, the U-20, under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Walther Schwieger, intercepted and sunk the liner Lusitania off the southern tip of Ireland. Although it was subsequently clearly established that the liner had indeed been carrying contraband war materials, in the form of thousands of cases of ammunition, shrapnel shells and fuses, Schwieger could not have known this, and his sinking of this great liner, with the loss of 1,198 lives, 128 of them American, provoked international outrage.
The consequences for Germany were grave, as the previously staunch isolationism of the United States gave way to a very pro-British and anti-German viewpoint, which contributed to the ultimate American decision to enter the war against the Central Powers.
In June the Kaiser called off attacks on passenger ships and in September he abandoned unrestricted attacks on merchant ships. The Germans then transferred the bulk of their U-Boat effort to the Mediterranean, and it was in this theatre that the greatest number of sinkings was achieved. In the space of just one month Korvenenkapitan Lothar Arnauld de la Periere sunk 54 ships, a total of over 91,000 tons. He expended just four torpedoes, sinking most of his victims with gunfire while surfaced. A chivalrous adversary, he invariably allowed the crews to abandon ship, and gave them sailing instructions to the nearest landfall before sending their ships to the bottom. By the end of the war he had reached the incredible total of over 200 enemy ships sunk, totaling almost half a million tons.
The Allies had little of effect to use against the U-Boats, and by the summer of 1916 around a million tons of Allied hipping had been sunk. Although the British did make use of the so-called 'Q-ships' - auxiliary cruisers disguised a innocent merchantmen intended to lure the U-Boat to the surface, whereupon the cruiser would bring her hidden guns to bear and sink the U-Boat – during the entire war only 14 U-Boats were lost in this war. In one such case, when U-27 was sunk by the Q-Ship Baralong, the survivors from U-27, including her captain, expecting to be rescued by the British, were hunted down one by one and brutally shot. By mid-1916 the U-Boat fleet had grown dramatically, and numbered over 134 vessels, including massive U-Freighters – large submarines that could bring vital supplies of war materials through the British blockade of German waters. By the end of that year Allied shipping losses were reaching crisis proportions. Between October and December of 1916 alone almost half a million tons of shipping were lost.
The Kaiser now gave his unhesitating support to the U-Boat war once again, and in 1917 the efforts of his U-Boat crews were rewarded with remarkable successes: in February 1917 over 256,000 tons of enemy shipping was sunk; in March the total reached 284,000 tons; and in April, over 516,000 tons. Were it not for the United States' entry into the war, in April 1917, it looked almost certain that the U-Boat campaign alone would bring Britain to its knees. In May 1917 over 540,000 tons of shipping was sunk, and the Admiralty gloomily predicted that if things continued thus, the war would be lost by the end of the year.
Then, in that same month, the British introduced the 'convoy' system to give merchant ships travelling together some degree of protection. It certainly paid dividends: only two per cent of ships travelling in convoy were lost as opposed to ten per cent of ships travelling alone. At the same time the Allies began a massive series of mine-laying operations, from Scapa Flow to the Norwegian coast, across the English Channel and along the Danish, Dutch and Norwegian coasts, effectively preventing the U-Boats from entering the Atlantic.
In July 1916 the most effective weapon against submarines so far, the depth charge, claimed its first U-Boat victim. The entry of the United States into the war had also meant a huge influx of warships for the Allies for convoy protection duties and for hunting down the U-Boats. From then on Allied shipping losses were drastically reduced, while U-Boat losses soared. Gradually Allied shipping production over-took losses, and the U-Boat was no longer in a position to decide the war in Germany's favour. Despite a brief flirtation with the concept of U-Cruisers – large submarines fitted with six-inch guns, which did have some success – the German high command lost faith in the U-Boat as the 'wonder weapon' which would bring ultimate victory. By 1918 U-Boat losses in comparison with tonnages sunk had reached an unacceptable level, and the morale of the U-Boat crews had deteriorated drastically. In October of that year, in view of impending peace negotiations, all offensive action against enemy shipping was halted. The last significant part played by the U-Boats in World War One was in the suppression of the German naval mutiny in October 1918. Loyal to the end, U-Boat crews were fully prepared to carry out their orders to 'fire without warning on any vessel flying the red flag'.
On 9 November 1918 all U-Boats were ordered to return to home ports to prepare for surrender.
During World War One Germany had produced almost 350 submarines of which almost 180 were lost due to enemy action. Of the 13,000 U-Boat crewmen, 5,354 died in action. Ultimately the U-Boat offensive had failed, but the U-Boat itself had been proven to be a formidable weapon, and its deadly potential was to be fully realized by the new German navy that was to rise from the ashes of the old.
BETWEEN THE WARS. Following the Treaty of Versailles, after World War One, Germany’s armed forces were drastically reduced and its navy was prohibited from having any U-Boats whatsoever. Even before the rise of the National Socialists and Hitler's rearmament programme, however, U-Boats were once again being built by German-sponsored firms, using German technology, design and know-how, albeit clandestinely.
The powerful and influential Krupp family had begun to finance a firm in The Hague, Holland, employing German engineers to design and build submarines, ostensibly for sale to foreign powers such as Japan, Turkey and Holland itself In fact the firm, known as Ingenieunkantoor voor Scheepsbouw, was also busily involved in manufacturing essential components for U-Boat construction, and was shipping them back to Germany for stockpiling. Following the Nazi accession to power, Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, in March 1935, and by the end of that year the carefully stockpiled components manufactured in Holland had been put to good use in the assembly of 14 U-Boats at the naval yards in Kiel. By mid-1939 the number of U-Boats available had risen to almost 60.
Although the German navy of the Weimar period, the Reichsmarine, had not been permitted L-Boats, there were still on its strength many experienced veterans of World War One, including Fregattenkapitan Karl Donitz. An enthusiastic supporter of the U-Boat as a potential war-winning weapon, he impressed his superiors by his dedication, and in September 1935 was rewarded with the command of the newly formed I Unterscebootsflotille Weddigen. He launched himself into his new duties with enthusiasm, and with great success. He had trained his men to such a high level of readiness that when, in the following year 2 Unter appointed to the newly created post of commander of U-Boats.
As war approached in 1939 the early Type IA and Type lIB boats were being joined by the much larger and vastly improved Type VII U-Boat. This was to be the mainstay of the U-Boot Waffe in World War Two, and the boat in which most of the U-Boat aces were to achieve their greatest successes. Shortly before the outbreak of war Donitz was promoted to the rank of Konteradmiral.
WORLD WAR TWO. 1939. Within two days of the outbreak of war the U-30, under the command of Kapitanleutnant Fritz Julius Lemp, torpedoed and sank the liner Athenia, having mistaken her for an auxiliary cruiser. This led the Allies to think that Germany had the intention of carrying out unrestricted submarine warfare, though this was certainly not the case. The propaganda value for the Allies of this apparently deliberate and dastardly attack on a passenger liner was immense, and caused much embarrassment to the Germans. Hitler ordered that absolutely no action of any kind was to be taken against passenger ships. Better news was received, however, on 17 September, when U-29, under Kapitanleutnant Ono Schuhhart, torpedoed and sank the British aircraft carrier H.M.S. Courageous. Just over a month later, Britain's morale suffered another heavy blow when U-4 7, under Kapitiinleutnant Gunther Prien, penetrated the supposedly impregnable Fleet base at Scapa Flow and sank the battleship Royal Oak, with considerable loss of life. By the end of 1939 U-Boat strength stood at 54 and some considerable successes had been achieved; the sinking of the Royal Oak in particular had delighted Hitler and done much to enhance the status of Konteradmiral Donitz and the U-Boats in the eyes of the Fuhrer.
1940. This was to be a year of consolidation for the U-Boot Waffe. Although a further 54 U-Boats were commissioned during the course of the year, some 26 were lost to enemy action, so that the net increase was only 28. In 1940 'wolf-pack' tactics were first used successfully against British convoys, and the fall of France presented the Germans with excellent base facilities for their operations in the Atlantic.
Successes varied. In April only six Allied ships, totalling some 30,900 tons, were sunk, while in June 63 Allied ships were sent to the bottom, some 355,400 tons. In all, 1940 saw the loss of just under 500 Allied ships to U-Boat attacks, around 2,373,000 tons. This was also the year in which some of the great aces began to make themselves known by their achievements; Prien and Schuhhart had achieved instant fame through the sinking of major enemy warships. Otto Kretschmer, Wolfgang Luth, Victor Oehrn and Joachim Schepke, to name but a few, joined the ranks of the Ritterkreuztrager, receiving the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross for running up considerable scores of enemy merchant shipping sunk. July of 1940 also saw restrictions on U-Boat operations lifted: all waters around Great Britain became a war zone in which any merchant shipping was liable to be attacked. The bases in France and occupied Norway also gave the Germans the opportunity to greatly expand U-Boat operations, and Allied shipping was soon being sunk as far afield as the waters off the coast of Africa and off North and South America.
In Germany, returning U-Boat crews were welcomed as heroes. All crews were chosen carefully, with only around ten per cent of all volunteers being accepted as of sufficiently high calibre. It was common practice for the crews to visit their boat while it was still under construction – effectively getting to know their boat inside out. They then trained intensively for at least two months on their new boat once it had been launched. By the time they set off on the boat's first war cruise, the boat and its crew had become a finely honed fighting machine. Each crew member was confident in his own skills, those of his comrades and, most importantly, those of his commander.
At sea the men lived in barely tolerable conditions. The Type VII was approximately 220 feet long and only 20 feet across at its widest point. Into this very limited space, as well as all the essential machinery and equipment, torpedoes, rations and so on, were crammed around 45 men. Each shared his bunk with a comrade, on a rotate system: as one left to go on watch, his bedspace would be taken by a comrade who had just finished his shift. No smoking was allowed on board, and shaving was a rare luxury, as was a proper wash. Special soap was provided for use with sea water, but it was all but useless. Conditions were almost invariably damp, so wet clothes rarely dried properly. Food quickly began to rot, and the atmosphere became foul. On top of all this there were only two toilets, one of which was usually used for storing rations, leaving only one in action – shared by over 40 men!
When they returned home after a war cruise, however, only the best was good enough for the U-Boat man. Special trains were laid on to take them back to Germany for home leave, if required. U-Boat pay, with all its additional allowances, was almost double that received by other sailors, and extensive leisure facilities were made available to the U-Boat crews.
1941. Early in 1941 Donitz succeeded in persuading Hitler to place a squadron of Focke-Wulf 200 'Condor' long-range maritime reconnaissance aircraft at his disposal (a move which greatly irritated the commander in chief of the Luftwaffe, Reichsmarschall Hermann Goring, who insisted that anything which flew came under his control) in order to help the U-Boats detect enemy convoys.
The first of the larger, Type IX, boats (1,120 tons as opposed to the 760 tons of the Type VII) were now coming into service, and having greater effect on long-distance cruises to the South Atlantic waters and beyond.
March was a disastrous month, however, with top aces Krctschmer, Pricn and Schepke being lost. Kretschmcr and some of his crew were rescued when his U-Boat was sunk, but Pricn and Schepke were both killed. U-Boat operations were also opened in the Mediterranean. Some 200 or so new U-Boats were commissioned during the course of the year and 38 were lost, giving the U-Boot Waffe a net strength of 247 vessels at the end of the year. A total of 445 enemy ships had been sunk, representing 2,171,890 tons.
Despite these successes, Allied use of radar in detection of U-Boats began to pay off, and the entrance of the United States into the war, in December, brought a vast new arsenal of weapons onto the Allied side. The achievements of the U-Boot Waffe had been considerable, however, and in the Mediterranean both the aircraft carrier Ark Royal and the battleship Barham had been lost.
1942. The entry of the United States into World War Two, in December 1941, saw U-Boats despatched to US coastal waters, for offensive operations against American ships for the first time. The Americans had virtually no black-out security at this time; harbour lights and ships' navigation lights were both used freely, and radio traffic continued unhindered. Thus the U-Boats had little or no difficulty in finding lucrative target areas. Over 120 ships were sunk during the first three months of the year, and in March the first of the U-Tankers went into action. With fuel resupply now available in the war zone, the effective range of the front-line U-Boat was now almost unlimited. It is estimated that by the end of April over 1,150,000 tons of Allied shipping, representing nearly 200 vessels, had been sunk. In May, however, the Americans began using the convoy system, and tightened up drastically on security. As a result U-Boat successes in American waters tailed off considerably.
Donitz then changed tack and sent his U-Boats into action against the considerable traffic in oil tankers in the Caribbean, causing great devastation. Here again, however, the Allies quickly adopted convoy tactics, and successes fell away, resulting in Donitz once again being forced to alter the thrust of his campaign and divert some of his boats into the waters of the South Atlantic. It was here that one of the most tragic incidents of the war at sea occurred.
U-156, under the command of Kapitanleutnant Werner Hartenstein, intercepted and sank the British troopship Laconia on 12 September. On hearing the cries of the survivors in the water, Hartenstein began picking them up. He soon realized that the troopship, as well as carrying British troops, had on board Italian prisoners of war and a number of civilians, including women and children. Soon every square foot of the U-Boat was packed with survivors. Some of the Italian prisoners of war had been bayoneted by their Polish guards as they had tried to escape the stricken ship, and they were treated on U-156, as were other survivors who had suffered shark bites while in the water.
Her decks crammed with survivors, U-156 was in no position to dive, and although two other U-Boats, an Italian submarine and two Vichy French warships were dispatched to aid in the rescue operation, Hartenstein took the risky step of broadcasting in clear, giving his exact position and guaranteeing not to attack any ships that would help with the rescue.
U-506 and U-507 arrived on the scene and took on a number of the survivors, leaving U-156 engaged in gathering up the numerous scattered lifeboats in preparation for the arrival of the French warships. On the fourth day after the sinking, an American B-24 Liberator bomber appeared. Hartenstein ordered a large Red Cross flag to be draped over his gun position to show his good intentions, and signalled to the bomber that he had rescued Allied personnel on board. Then an RAF officer who had been rescued took the signalling lamp and repeated the message, adding that there were women and children on board. Despite this, the B-24 attacked, dropping bombs which killed a number of the survivors. The plane then departed, returned to its base, rearmed, and returned to attack the U-156 again, causing further deaths and damage to the U-Boat. Hartenstein was left with no option but to abandon the rescue, and reluctantly ordered the survivors on board U-156 to return to the Laconia's lifeboats, whereupon he left the scene before his boat could be attacked again. It was later discovered that the pilot of the B-2-1 had understood the messages flashed to him from the bridge of the U-156, but had nevertheless been ordered to press home his attack on the grounds that the U-Boat still posed a potential threat to Allied shipping. The survivors from the Laconia had been considered expendable.
Donitz furiously ordered that never again should one of his U-Boat commanders put his boat and his crew at risk in a rescue operation.
That year U-Boat production hit 238; with 88 lost, net strength was boosted to 397 boats. Well over a thousand enemy ships had been sunk, representing almost six million tons. It was a total which would never again be reached as Allied anti-submarine measures became ever more effective and U-Boat losses grew. The 'Happy Time' was over.
1943. The beginning of 19-1-3 saw the Allies launch massive bombing attacks both on the U-Boat bases and on the shipyards where they were constructed. At sea, how-ever, successes against the Atlantic convoys by U-Boat wolf-packs continued. On 16 and 17 March convoys HX-229 and SC-122 came under attack by wolf-packs: 22 Allied ships were sunk, but just one U-Boat lost. Donitz was ecstatic, but his joy would not last, for this was to be the high point of the U-Boat war; the tide turned.
Although the Allies had known of the Enigma encoding device since before the war, it was only in May 1941, after Kapitanleutnant Fritz Julius Lemp's U-110 was attacked and disabled by British escort vessels, that the latest improved version, as supplied to the Kriegsmarine, fell into British hands. Scuttling charges intended to sink the U-Boat had failed to explode, thus allowing a British boarding party to recover the Enigma machine, as well as a copy of the latest codes. The British were now able to intercept all messages between Donitz and his U-Boats. The location of each U-Boat, its destination and its intended target all became known to the Allies; needless to say, U-Boat losses rocketed.
The Enigma device was, however, only part of the answer: the codes were also needed, and each time the enemy changed the codes, it took time for British intelligence to crack the new codes; in this period, U-boat success would mount once again. By 1943, however, despite the introduction of an improved version of the machine, it was taking British intelligence less than two weeks to crack the new codes. This success, together with new anti-sub-marine measures such as Hedgehog (a multi-barrel-led mortar), acoustic torpedoes dropped by aircraft which homed in on the sound of the li-Boats' engines, detection devices which picked up on the U-Boats' magnetic fields, and, above all, massive strength in escorting ships and aircraft, sounded the death knell for the U-Boats. In May 1943, from over 30 U-Boats sent into action against the Atlantic convoys, almost a third were lost without having fired a single torpedo.
Donitz reluctantly ordered his U-Boats withdrawn from operation in North Atlantic. During 1943 some 290 new U-Boats were launched, but losses were very heavy, at 245. Although some 451 enemy ships had been sunk, totalling 2,395,500 tons, this was less than half the number of the previous year.
1944. U-Boat activity was drastically curtailed by 1944, though in the Mediterranean, U-Boats saw action against the Allied invasion fleet at Anzio.
The installation of snorkel equipment in U-Boats allowed them to recharge their batteries while still under water, thus improving their chance of avoiding detection by Allied ships or aircraft. However, it was a case of too little, too late.
A far more important development was the launching of the first Type XXI U-Boat, in April. This new vessel was much larger than the Type VII or Type IX and featured such luxuries as refrigerated food storage and automatic loading devices for the torpedo tubes. Unfortunately the need to retrain crews for service in these technically advanced vessels delayed their introduction into combat service until it was too late.
The Allied invasion of Normandy, in June 1941, heralded the end of the U-Boat bases in France. By August all U-Boats in France had been withdrawn to bases in Norway. In September U-Boats were withdrawn from the Mediterranean, and those based in the Black Sea were scuttled. For the first time U-Boat losses exceeded new launchings, with 264 being sunk and only 230 commissioned. Only 131 Allied ships, totalling some 701,900 tons, had been sunk.
1945. In the last few months of the war U-Boat operations were once again concentrated where they had been when war broke out-in British coastal waters.
Although some dozen or so Type XXI U-Boats were ready for action by the end of the war, only one saw combat action: U-2511, commanded by Korvettcnkapitan Adalbert Schnee. It intercepted a powerful British surface force, including a heavy cruiser with its attendant escorting screen of destroyers. Schnee's U-Boat passed through the escorts undetected, and set up a dummy attack on the cruiser, which went off perfectly. Unfortunately for Schnee, the order to cease hostilities had already been given, and he was obliged to allow his target to pass unmolested.
In the first five months of the year 93 U-Boats were commissioned, but 399 were sunk. Only 71 Allied ships, representing around 332,600 tons, were sunk.
Despite the dwindling successes in the last two years of the war, the U-Boats had achieved a great deal. A total of over 2,800 enemy ships had been sunk – over 14 million tons. Despite the horrendous losses suffered, the fighting spirit of the U-Boot Waffe was never crushed. Of around 35,000 men who served in U-Boats, well over 28,000 -over 80 per cent-lost their lives. Although they were deadly adversaries, and were hunted down with great determination, the men of the U-Boot Waffe earned the respect of their enemies, and visitors to the U-Boat memorial at Moltenort today will still find wreaths and tributes from the navies of former adversaries.
ORGANISATION AND COMMAND STRUCTURE. Supreme command of the U-Boats lay with Adolf Hitler in his capacity as Oberbefehlslraber tier Wehrmacht, or commander in chief armed forces. Directly beneath Hitler in the chain of command came the supreme commander in chief navy, or Oberbe.fehlshaber der Mari11e, a post held initially by Grossadmiral Erich Raeder and later by Grossadmiral Karl Donitz. Answering to the Supreme C-in-C navy was the naval high command or Oberkommando der Marine (O.K.M.), which was subdivided into several branches – administration, construction, operation and so on.
Next in line came the C-in-C U-Boats or Befehlshaber der U-Boote ( Bd U), initially Karl Donitz. After Donitz succeeded Raeder as C-in-C navy, he retained his interest and overall command of the U-Boats.
U-Boat command was divided into the operational department commanded by Admiral Eberhard Godt and the organisational department commanded by Admiral Hans-Georg von Friedeburg.
U-BOAT UNIFORMS. The German naval uniform has altered little during the course of this century. Apart from dispensing with items such as the frock-coat and the bicorn hat, the basic uniform of today still very much resembles those of the two world wars. To amid unnecessary and space-consuming duplication in the text, rather than deal with each detail of the Kaiserliche Marine, Reichsmarine and Kriegsmarine uniforms separately, each uniform garment will be dealt with once, and any important differences between the uniforms of each era will be highlighted. For a fuller study of the uniforms of the Kriegsmarine period the reader is recommended the excellent three-volume work Uniforms and Traditions of the Kriegsmarine by John R. Angolia and Adolf Schlicht (R. James Bender Publishing, California).
Tunics and Trousers. The Reefer Jacket. The normal service dress of officers and warrant officers was the reefer jacket. Though much of the blue issue clothing was eventually not worn by U-Boat crews at sea, photographic evidence shows that the top part was worn on many occasions, though not always with the regulation trousers or footwear.
The reefer jacket was cut from fine dark blue woollen worsted or doeskin-type cloth, double-breasted with open collar and lapels in traditional style. It featured two internal skirt pockets with external flaps, and one internal breast pocket, on the left side, without a flap. The jacket had a double row of five gilt metal anchor motif buttons (many of the reefer jackets of the Imperial Navy only featured four pairs), the top pair of which were set slightly wider than the others and were usually for decoration.
Rank for officers was displayed by means of slce1e rings in gilt metallic wire braid: For Leutnant, a single broad ring; for Oberleutnant, two broad rings; for Kapitiinleutnant, one narrow ring sandwiched between two broad rings; and for Konettenkapitan, three broad rings. The majority of U-Boat commanders had the rank of Kapitanleutnant; those of higher rank usually had shore postings as flotilla commanders and so on.
Above the sleeve rings was a gilt wire emblem indicating the officer's career branch. For line officers this was a five-pointed star; for engineering officers a cogwheel; for Kaiserliche Marine officers it was a gilt-wire embroidered Hohenzollern crown, which was replaced by the five-pointed star after the abolition of the monarchy.
For officers and warrant officers of the Kriegsmarine, the right breast of the jacket featured the national emblem of eagle and swastika embroidered either in fine gilt wire or yellow cellulose cord. (The gilt wire tarnished very quickly in salt air.)
Warrant officers had no sleeve rings; instead, their rank and trade were displayed by means of shoulder straps. These were in dark blue cloth with 2 cm-wide gilt braid edging. In the centre was a small gilt anchor motif with, where appropriate, a trade symbol superimposed on it. Specific rank was shown by small aluminium rank pips. Buttons on all naval jackets bore a fouled anchor motif (an anchor with a rope twisted round its shank) and the edge of the buttons had a twisted rope-effect border. Imperial era buttons also featured the Hohenzollern crown above the anchor. The buttons for the field grey and tropical clothing lacked the rope-effect border and had a field grey or tan painted finish.
The reefer jacket was to be worn with a white shirt and black tie.
The Pea Jacket. The pea jacket was normal service dress for lower ranks during the cooler months, and was the junior ranks' equivalent of the greatcoat. It was cut from heavy-quality dark blue melton cloth, was double-breasted and, like the reefer jacket, featured two flapped skirt pockets.
The pea jacket was sometimes known as the Collani, after a well-known German naval outfitters. It was worn over the traditional sailor's pullover shirt, and featured a double row of fi,c gilt metal anchor buttons (in some late World War Two examples the buttons were simply painted plastic). Early pea jackets had six pairs of buttons; the change to five was made in 1933. As with the reefer jacket, the top pair of buttons was not actually used, and were concealed by the lapels of the jacket.
Collar patches were worn with the pea jacket. For lower ranks they were in plain blue (which varied from a royal blue to a dark blue only a few shades lighter than the pea jacket itself). Petty officers had a single strip of gilt braid and chief petty officers two strips of gilt braid. For both petty officer grades the collar was to have featured 2 cm-wide gilt braid edging, though this was sometimes missing.
On the right breast of the Kriegsmarine pea jacket was the eagle and Swastika national emblem, machine- or hand-embroidered in golden yellow yarn.
Rank and trade were indicated by a series of arm badges. For lower ranks this comprised the trade symbol with rank chevrons, where appropriate. For petty officers it comprised a large fouled anchor with the trade symbol superimposed on it, where necessary, and for chief petty officers, a single chevron below this insignia. The badges were golden yellow cotton embroidery on dark blue cloth. Petty and chief petty officers, however, could privately purchase fine gilt metal examples of their badges.
Petty and chief petty officers of the Imperial Hohenzollern wore the Imperial Hohenzollern crown above the anchor of their insignia. Below the crown could be worn a trade speciality insignia. A wide of these were produced, in red embroidery on dark blue to indicate the wearer’s speciality within his trade branch.
The Parade jacket. The parade jacket was an extremely smart form of formal wear for full-dress occasions parades, award ceremonies and so on. It had a short, waistcoat-type body, which closely resembled that of the officer's mess jacket, and was commonly referred to as the Affenjacke, or 'monkey jacket'. It "as made from fine-quality doeskin-type wool and was single-breasted, fastened by a pair of small gilt anchor buttons linked by a gilt metal chain. The buttons were just at the base of the lapels.
At roughly the centre of each front panel was a vertical row of nine small gilt metal anchor buttons. On each cuff was a small strip of dark blue cloth hearing a further five such buttons. The cuff of the parade jacket for petty officer and chief petty officer ranks was decorated with 2 cm-wide gilt metallic braid.
Thus far, apart from the additional Hohenzollern crown motif to the buttons of the Imperial era parade jacket, the styles worn during the Imperial, Weimar and Third Reich eras were all but identical.
Kriegsmarine parade jackets featured the eagle and swastika national emblem on the right breast, just above the level of the top button. Rank and trade insignia were worn on the left sleeve, in exactly the same fashion as for the pea jacket. The parade jacket was worn over the traditional sailor's pullover shirt, but unlike the pea jacket, the sailor's collar, or Kieler Kragen, was worn outside the jacket.
The Pullover Shirt. In the German navy, as in most navies of the world, the traditional service dress of lower ranks was the pullover shirt. This was in effect a three-part outfit comprising the shirt itself, the sailor's collar and a black silk neckerchief.
The pullover shirt was a close-fitting garment made from warm dark blue wooI. It had slit cuffs with button fastenings. The front opening of the shirt, which reached half-way down the chest, was tied with two cornflower blue cords which were then tucked inside the shirt. The shirt itself featured a dark blue flap collar over which the Kieler Kragen was worn.
The eagle and swastika emblem on Kriegsmarine shirts was woven in golden yellow artificial silk on a dark blue backing. Rank, trade and specialist insignia were worn on the left sleeve, in the same manner as for the pea jacket and the parade jacket, with the exception that gilt metal badges could not be worn on the shirt.
Although apparently not a particularly suitable form of dress for wear on board a submarine, photographs show that it was sometimes worn.
A white summer version of this shirt was also produced,with contrasting cornflower blue cuffs and an insignia in blue on a white backing. The white pullover shirt would normally be worn by U–Boat crews in conjunction with the parade jacket only for ceremonies or on parade.
Trousers and Footwear for the Blue Uniform. Trousers worn by officers and warrant officers with the reefer jacket were normally of the same finequality dark blue material, and had plain 60 cm-wide bottoms. They had a fly front, with button fastening, buttons on the waistband to take braces, t o side pockets and a rear pocket on the right side.
Officers and warrant officers were permitted to wear just about any suitable lace-up shoe in plain black leather. A heavier shoe, realy an ankle-boot, was also occasionally worn. As the leg of this boot was covered by the trouser leg, it is almost impossible in most photographs to tell whether shoes or ankle-boots are being worn.
Ranks up to chief petty officer wore the traditional sailor's trousers, cut in dark blue melton cloth and with a flap rather than a fly front. The legs had 60 cm-wide bottoms and were cut to be 2 cm narrower at the knee. German sailor's trousers were pressed with a normal front and back vertical crease rather than the horizontal creases traditional in the Royal Navy. When worn as part of the landing rig, the trouser legs were rolled up slightly, exposing the shafts of the sea-boot.
Normal footwear with the sailor's trousers was the ankle-boor or sea-boot, the latter being similar to the German army jackboot but with a cork lining to the sole.
The Work Shirt. Similar in cut to the standard pullover shirt, the work shirt was cut from heavy-duty white moleskin cloth and was fitted with a large patch pocket on the right breast. They had no national insignia or rank insignia, but if required, the Kieler Kragen and black silk neckerchief could be worn. Matching white heavy-duty moleskin work trousers were to be worn with this shirt. The whole uniform had to be very hard-wearing as it invariably became filthy and had to withstand repeated washing.
The White Summer Tunic. Photographs show U-Boat officers wearing this tunic when on service in the tropics, though it would not normally be worn on board ship. SeveraI U-Boats operated in Pacific waters, from Japanese-controlled bases, and the white uniform was often worn on shore as standard service dress.
The tunic was single-breasted with an open collar and pleated patch pockets on the breast and skirt. The front was fastened by four gilt metal anchor motif buttons. The cuffs were plain.
On Kriegsmarine issue tunics a gilt metal pin-backed eagle and swastika emblem was worn over the right breast pocket. No sleeve rings were worn on this tunic; rank was displayed by means of shoulder straps. All insignia, including buttons, had to be removable to facilitate cleaning.
Matching white trousers were to be worn with the tunic, along with a whire shirt and black tie. As often as not, white shoes were also worn.
The Work Jacket. The work jacket, intended for use by junior NCO grades, was widely used by U-Boat personnel. It was a single-breasted jacket with plain patch pockets on the skirt. The pockets had no flaps. It was cut from greyish-green hard-wearing drill fabric and fastened by four plain plastic four-hole-type buttons, with the top button usually left unfastened. It often, though not invariably, featured the eagle and Swastika emblem on the right breast. Near to the bottom of each sleeve was a small button-fastened strap for adjustment.
The Field Grey Uniform. All naval personnel, no matter what their intended final branch of service, underwent a period of basic military training, which included learning basic infantry skills. During this period, the field grey uniform was worn.
The field grey naval blouse was very similar to that of the German army, and indeed some stocks of army clothing were used by naval personnel. The naval version usually featured a plain field grey collar. There were four pockets – two pleated patch pockets on the breast and two flapped slash pockets on the shirt. The blouse was single-breasted and fastened by five buttons bearing the anchor motif and painted field grey.
The eagle and swastika emblem was worn over the right breast pocket, and was either machine-wowen or machine-embroidered in golden yellow thread on a field grey or dark green base. Collar patches were in army style: two bars of mouse grey litzen with a yellow stripe to the centre of each and the space in between the bars in white.
While undergoing basic training, shoulder straps were not worn, since the trainee was not then considered a qualified soldier. For those destined for a sea-going career, this was the only time they were likely to wear the field grey naval uniform.
Field grey or stone grey trousers were worn with the field grey blouse. Foot wear consisted of the jackboot, with the ends of the trousers tucked into the shaft of the boot, or ankle-boots and gaiters.
Tropical-Issue Uniform. Not specifically intended for U-Boat personnel, but widely worn by them, was the tropical-issue uniform. Its tunic was cut from a brownish-tan denim-type drill material, and was single-breasted with a five-button fastening and pleated patch pockets to the breast and skirt of the tunic. The collar could be fastened at the neck, but was almost invariably worn open. The pockets featured scalloped flaps, and all the buttons on the tunic were of the same style as those for the field grey dress but painted a tan colour. Above the right breast pocket was the eagle and swastika in golden yellow yarn on a tan backing.
Shoulder straps were worn to indicate rank. Those for officers were of the same pattern as on the white summer tunic, while those for NCOs and lower ranks were cut from the same dark tan-coloured material as the jacket itself, and had blue rather than gilt braid edging for NCOs, where appropriate. The sleeves had false turn-back cuffs.
A tropical shirt was also issued. This was a pullover type, with four-button fastening to the slash. It had two pleated patch breast pockets and loops sewn to the shoulder seams to accommodate shoulder straps. An eagle and swastika breast badge, identical to that on the tunic, was positioned over the right breast pocket.
For wear with the tropical tunic or shirt, both long and short trousers were produced. The long trousers had belt loops fitted, two slash side pockets w ith button fastening and a rear pocket on the right side. The short trousers had similar belt loops and pockets, but also had a small fob pocket to the right front panel. They were intended to be worn to just above the knee, but were often shortened considerably.
U-Boat Battle-dress. A special uniform, closely resembling British battle-dress, was issued to U-Boat crews for wear at sea, and from photographic evidence it seems to have been the most popular of all forms of clothing among U-Boat personnel. The blouse was a short, waist-length garment cut from greyish-green denim-type drill material and fitted with pleated patch breast pockets. The pockets usually have a straight-cut flap. The single-breasted jacket was fastened with five buttons, and the cuffs of the blouse sleeves were slit, with button fastening.
The blouse featured a waistband, with a long tail-piece to one side, which formed the tongue of a belt attachment. This passed through a friction buckle to the other side of the waistband. There seems to have been little or no standardization on the fittings which accompanied this blouse. Examples show field grey or tropical brown painted buttons, with plain black plastic four-hole-type buttons, or with the gilt metal anchor buttons from the blue uniform. Shoulder straps and breast eagles were worn as often as not. Petty and chief petty officers often wore a small chevron of gilt braid (sometimes gilt metal) on the 'point' of the collar. The blouse could be fastened up to the neck, but the top button was almost always left unfastened.
Trousers were of identical material and featured belt loops to carry a cloth belt with a friction buckle. The bottom of each leg had a button-down adjusting strap.
It should also be noted that considerable stocks of British lightweight denim battledress were captured after the fall of France, and were put to good use by U-Boat crews since they closely resembled the German pattern. In wartime black-and-white photographs it can be difficult to detect which is being worn. There are, however, one or two clues: British battledress invariably has scalloped flaps to the pockets, whereas German-made pieces usually (though not always) carried straight-cut flaps; the cuffs to German blouses were slit, with button fastenings, whereas British blouses featured distinct wristbands; and finally, the trousers for British battledress had a large patch pocket just above the knee on the left leg.
AIthough the ankle-boot was occasionally worn with this form of dress, it seems that the most popular form of footwear on U-Boats was the cam as shoe. It had a sole made from leather or composite material and canvas uppers which were reinforced at the heel, side and toe by leather or composite material. These were both comfortable, practical, and quiet to move about in – essential when the U-Boat was rigged for silent running.
Leather Clothing. Two specific forms of leather jacket were produced for naval personnel, and both were widely used by U-Boat crews. Those worn by the Kriegsmarine were virtually indistinguishable from those worn in the Kaiserliche Marine apart from the buttons of the latter bearing the Hohenzollern crown.
Engine Personnel. The jacket for so-called Maschinenpersonal was a single-breasted leather garment with a five-button fastening and a stand-up collar. It featured a single internal pocket on the left breast, w ith an external flap, and two internal skirt pockets, also with external flaps. At the bottom of each sleeve was a leather strap with button fastening for adjusting the fit of the cuff. Although the jacket was also made in black leather, those used by U-Boat crews were predominantly pale grey.
Deck Personnel . The leather jacket for deck personnel was a three-quarter-length double-breasted reefer-style jacket, usually fastened by four buttons but with a fifth pair which could be used to button the jacket up to the neck in foul weather. It had two internal skirt pockets with external flaps and two slanted slash pockets at lower-chest level. The cuffs were plain. The jacket invariably had a horizontal seam at chest level. Like the jacket for engine personnel, it came in both black and grey leather, with grey predominant among U-Boat personnel. It was occasionally fitted w ith shoulder straps.
Both types of jacket were lined in warm dark grey blanket material. The trousers for both jackets were cut from material identical to the jacket.
They had straight legs and were made from several pieces of leather, so invariably had horizontal seams across the legs. They had button-fly fronts and side pockets and were fitted with buttons to take braces.
Foul-Weather Wear. Basic foul-weather wear consisted of a large, loose-fitting, knee-length double-breasted jacket in black rubberised material. It had two slanted slash pockets at lower-chest level. The interior lining of the sleeve was elasticated at the wrist, and the large collar could be turned up and fastened across the throat by a small strap to protect the side and rear of the wearer's head.
Waterproof black overrtrousers in a similar material were also provided. They were fastened by a draw-string at the waist and had slash openings to allow access to the trousers beneath.
A waterproof balaclava-type cape was worn over the entire head and shoulders except the front of the face, and he ensemble was completed with a traditional sou’wester. This form of dress, though ungainly, was essential for standing watch on the bridge of a U-Boat in the teeth of an Atlantic storm.
Headgear. The range of headgear worn by the German navy was quite extensive, but by no means would all of it have been used by the crews of the U-Boats. This section therefore details the types shown by photographs to have been worn on a reasonably regular basis.
The Peaked Cap. The peaked cap, or Schirmmutze, was the headgear most commonly worn by officers and warrant officers of the U-Boot Waffe of both the Kaiscrliche Marine and the Kriegsmarine. The version worn in the Kaiser's navy consisted of a fine dark blue wool or doeskin top, of fairly small dimensions, fitted to a band covered with a woven black mohair capband and featuring a shiny black leather peak fitted with black leather edge binding. It had a black leather chinstrap held by two small gilt metal anchor motif buttons.
Insignia for officers consisted of a gilt wire hand-embroidered wreath of oakleaves surrounding a cockade in the national colours. At the top was a gilt wire-embroidered Hohenzollern crown. This insignia was stitched to the mohair band which was itself removable from the cap.
For warrant officers the wreath of oakleaves was removed, leaving the crown and the national cockade. The crown, however, featured ribbon streamers. Although white tops were worn on these caps, the use of the white cover had not begun to see widespread use as the unofficial symbol of the U-Boat commander. The Schirmmutze worn by the Reichsmarine of the Weimar Republic was similar to its Imperial predecessor but with a larger crown, which was usualIy fitted with a wire stiffener, giving it a rigid appearance - the so-called 'Tellerfrmn' or saucer shape. The Imperial crown was deleted from the cap insignia, and the national cockade was replaced by a new one, oval in shape and bearing the black eagle emblem of the Reichsmarine.
Initially, when the Third Reich came into being, the Schirmmutze simply received a new set of insignia: the weimar cockade was removed from the cap insignia and the national colours cockade was once again featured. Above this, on the front of the cap, was pinned a small gilt metal eagle and swastika device.
Around 1936 the cap was redesigned. It received a larger crown, usually worn without the wire stiffener, giving it a floppy appearance. For officers the peak was covered in dark blue cloth and bound in black leather. On the blue cloth covering the rank grouping was embroidered. For Leutnant to Kapitanleutnant it was a narrow band of gilt scallops, with the curves towards the cap; for Korvettenkapitan to Kapitan it was a wide band of gilt oakleaves; and for ranks from Kommodore up-wards, a double-wide band of gilt oakleaves. Cap insignia were almost invariably embroidered, in gilt wire or yellow celluloid thread, though the gilt metal eagle and swastika continued to be worn on the white summer top. For warrant officers the peak was in shiny black leather, or Vulkanfibre, with leather edge binding.
It became almost universal practice for U-Boat commanders to wear the Schirmmutze with the white summer top to identify them instantly as the boat's commander. This was unofficial, as the white cover was teoretically only to be worn during summer months. Caps were manufactured in a variety of styIes – fixed blue top, fixed white top or inter-changeable tops.
The Matrosenmutze. The traditional sailor's cap of the German navy had a fine dark blue wool top attached to a stiffened blue wool-covered band to which was fitted a tally ribbon bearing the name of the wearer's vesseI or shore establishment. Caps worn by sailors of the Kaiserliche Marine had noticeably smaller tops than those of later years. The tally ribbon was made from black silk, and was of such a length that when attached to the cap, the excess formed two long tails.
For Kaiserliche Marine caps the only insignia worn was the cockade in the national colours. For Reichsmarine caps it was the small oval plate in metal, bearing the black Reichsmarine eagle, and for Kriegsmarine caps it was a small gilt eagle and swastika, to the base of which was attached a small metal cockade in the national colours.
Tally ribbons for the Kaiserliche Mlarine had gilt wire block lettering for sea-going personnel (silver for administrative personnel). Reichsmarine tallies also had gilt woven block letters, until 1929, when Gothic letters were introduced. Gothic lettering was also used by the Kriegsmarine (and for some time post-World war two by the west German Bundesmarine, before block letters were reintroduced. Reichsmarine and Kriegsmarine caps had a larger crown than the older Imperial caps.
The Bordmutze. The Bortlmutze was a 'fore and aft'-style side cap which folded flat when not in use. lt was cut from fine-quality naly blue wooI, usually with a black or dark blue cotton or artificial silk lining. The flap to the cap was tapered, and was wider in the centre than at the front or rear of the cap. On the front was a yellow on dark blue eagle and swastika badge, over a cockade in the national colours.
Officers' caps featured gilt woven aluminium braid piping to the flap, and often had the insignia woven in metallic thread or hand-embroidered in bullion thread. As often as not, however, many U-Boat commanders seem to have selected to wear the standard lower ranks' pattern.
A white summer version was also produced, from white twill and with a white lining and the eagle and swastika insignia embroidered in blue thread.
Sailors undergoing their basic infantry training could wear a version of the Bordmutze in field grey cloth with the insignia woven in yellow on a dark green or field grey backing.
The Tropical Field Cap. A tropical field cap was manufactured for naval personnel. It was cut from khaki-brown denim-type twill material with false flaps and a long peal to shade the eyes from the sun. It had a metal grommet either side of the crown for ventilation. On the front was a machine-wowen eagle and swastika in golden yellow on a tan base, over a machine-woven cockade in the national colours. The lining was usually green, but occasionally red, cotton. Officers' caps were manufactured with gilt aluminium braid piping to the crown.
The Tropical Sun Helmet. The navy also produced its own sun helmet, but it was cumbersome and large, which made it unsuitable for use by submariners. Nevertheless a few photos exist showing it being worn by U-Boat crew men, but this would be the exception rather than the rule.
The Steel Helmet. The steel helmet worn by naval personnel was identical to the army helmet: the Model 1916, ModeI 1918, Model 1935, Model 1940 and Model 1942 'raw edge' types were all worn. The only difference between the army and the navy patterns was in the insignia. On the left side of the helmet was a decal showing a black shield with a gilt eagle and swastika for the navy and a silver shield for the army. Reichsmarine helmets from the Weimer era often featured a shield with two crossed anchors.
The Woollen Cap. A knitted woollen cap was available on official issue fin· naval personnel, and was extremely popular among U-Boat crewmen. It was knitted from dark blue wool in a basic 'tube', with the open end rolled up and the dosed end finished with a woollen pom-pom which gave the cap its nickname, Pudelmutze, or 'poodle cap'.
Belts, Buckles and Accoutrements. The standard navy-issue belt for lower ranks was black leather and 4-5 mm wide. On the left end was a metal catch and on the right side, on the inside face, was stitched a leather tongue, 35 mm wide and with seven pairs of holes to which the buckle could be attached. The reverse face of the buckle featured on one side a metal loop into which the belt catch was hooked, and on the other a bar with a double prong fitting for attachment to the tongue.
The face of the buckle bore a disc. A round the lower edge of the disc was a spray of oakleaves, and around the upper edge, the legend 'Gott Mit Uns' (God with us). In the centre, for Imperial naval buckles, was the Hohenzollern crown, for Weimar period buckles the Reichsmarine eagle, and for Kriegsmarine buckles the eagle and swastika. Most early buckles were made of steel, but later examples were made from a number of light metal alloys including aluminium. Those for normal service wear were gilt-finished and those for active service were painted either dark blue or field grey. Belts for use in tropical areas were made from khaki-coloured webbing material.
For officers the normal service dress belt was made from brow n or black leather 50-55 mm wide with an open rectangular buckle with double claw fitting and pebbled finish, in a matt silver colour. For parade or full-dress formal occasions, it was made from woven aluminium brocade and was 50 mm wide and backed with dark blue cloth. Two broken black lines were woven into the brocade laterally with the belt, around 15 mm from each edge. The buckle used was circular and comprised a wreath of oakleaves surrounding a ribbed field on which sat a fouled anchor (topped by a Hohenzollern crown on Imperial examples). A 22 mm-wide slide in the same style as the belt was sited either side of the buckle. The buckle was finished in gilt for line officers and silver for administrative officials. A smaller version of this buckle was also worn on a 35 mm-wide ribbed black fabric belt worn under the jacket or coat and from which was hung the dagger or sword: the hanging straps passed through a slit in the lining and appeared from under the pocket flap.
Accoutrements in the form of ammunition pouches, pistol holsters, leather 'Y' strap belt supports and so on used by naval personnel were identical to the standard army pattern.